Dev guide release post (#738)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2024-03-11-devguide-release-0.9.0/index.md

twitterImg: img/blog-images/2019-05-16-dev-guide-update/cover.png
output: 
twitterAlt: cover of rOpenSci dev guide, showing a package production line with small humans discussing, examining and promoting packages
---

rOpenSci Software Peer Review's guidance is gathered in an [online book](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/booknews) that keeps improving!
This blog post summarises what's new in our Dev Guide 0.9.0, with all changes listed in the [changelog](https://devguide.ropensci.org/booknews.html).

## Now available in Spanish!

Our guide is now bilingual (English and [Spanish](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/es/index.es.html)), thanks to work by [Yanina Bellini Saibene](/author/yanina-bellini-saibene/), [Elio Campitelli](/author/elio-campitelli/) and [Pao Corrales](/author/pao-corrales/), and thanks to [support of the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, NumFOCUS, and the R Consortium](/blog/2023/01/12/multilingual-publishing-en/).
[Read the guide in Spanish](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/es/index.es.html).

You can find out more about our multilingual publishing project in the materials and recording from a recent [community call](/commcalls/nov2023-multilingual/).

> Reusable artefacts from the project include our [translation guide](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/), the [babelquarto package](https://docs.ropensci.org/babelquarto/) to render multilingual Quarto books or websites, the [babeldown package](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/) to create and update translations using the DeepL API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Useful tools produced by the project include our [translation guide](https://translationguide.ropensci.org/), the [babelquarto package](https://docs.ropensci.org/babelquarto/) to render multilingual Quarto books or websites, and the [babeldown package](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/) to create and update translations using the DeepL API.
```

Our guide is now also getting translated to [Portuguese](https://ropensci.org/blog/2023/10/20/news-october-2023/#help-us-translate-our-dev-guide-to-portuguese) thanks to volunteers.
We are very grateful for their work!

## Policy updates

We have updated [Aims and Scope](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/softwarereview_policies#package-categories) to include translation packages, remove experimental text-processing categories, and provide clarifications around API wrappers.

In our [guide for authors](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/softwarereview_author), we now correctly refer to the lifecycle stage "Stable" as the one at which a package can be submitted, thanks to a contribution by GitHub user [bart1](https://github.com/bart1).

## rOpenSci Package maintainer cheatsheet

> We have created a [cheatsheet for maintainer of rOpenSci packages](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/maintenance_cheatsheet) that reminds them of how to ask for help on different topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have created a [cheatsheet for maintainers of rOpenSci packages](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/maintenance_cheatsheet) about how to ask for help on different topics.
```

## Improvements to the packaging guide

The package guide chapter received several improvements.

> We've updated our [advice around roxygen2](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/pkg_building#roxygen-2-use), mainly linking to roxygen2 website. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've updated our [advice around roxygen2](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/pkg_building#roxygen-2-use), mainly linking to the roxygen2 website. 
```
... and do we want to link to the website there? (Probably not, but wanted to ask regardless.)

The advice also includes an explanation of how to document an argument's default, thanks to [Hugo Gruson](https://github.com/bisaloo).

> We have also improved our wording to underline that using roxygen2 still means manual efforts (thanks to [Vincent van Hees](https://github.com/vincentvanhees)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have also improved our wording to emphasise that using roxygen2 still means manual efforts (thanks to [Vincent van Hees](https://github.com/vincentvanhees)).
```

## Better documentation of the process

We now highlight the values (tone) of our system in more places: at the top of the reviewer guide, in the template for review requests, and in the message our bot posts after editors [assign a reviewer](https://github.com/ropensci-org/buffy/pull/77/files).

> **rOpenSci’s community is our best asset. 
We aim for reviews to be open, non-adversarial, and focused on improving software quality. 
Be respectful and kind! 
See our reviewers guide and [code of conduct](https://ropensci.org/code-of-conduct/) for more.**

[Alexander Fischer](https://github.com/s3alfisc/) added an explanation of package submission via non-default branches to the [guide for authors](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/softwarereview_author) and to the  [guide for reviewers](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/softwarereview_reviewer#general-guidelines).

Our guide reviewers now clearly explains how to [volunteer as a reviewer, in general and for a particular submission](https://devdevguide.netlify.app/softwarereview_reviewer#volunteering-as-a-reviewer).

## Conclusion

> In this post we summarized the changes incorporated into our book “rOpenSci Packages: Development, Maintenance, and Peer Review” over the last months. We are thankful for all contributions that shaped this release. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post we summarized the changes incorporated into our book p“rOpenSci Packages: Development, Maintenance, and Peer Review”](https://devguide.ropensci.org) over the last months.
We are thankful for all contributions that shaped this release. 
```
